* Intro
Experimental psychology
@Google Talks is proud to welcome hero of psychology, Daniel Kahneman.

Daniel Kahneman, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for his
seminal work in psychology that challenged the rational model of judgment
and decision making, is one of our most important thinkers. His ideas have
had a profound and widely regarded impact on many fields—including
economics, medicine, and politics—but until now, he has never brought
together his many years of research and thinking in one book. 

In the highly anticipated Thinking, Fast and Slow, Kahneman takes us on a
groundbreaking tour of the mind and explains the two systems that drive the
way we think. System 1 is fast, intuitive, and emotional; System 2 is
slower, more deliberative, and more logical. Kahneman exposes the
extraordinary capabilities—and also the faults and biases—of fast thinking,
and reveals the pervasive influence of intuitive impressions on our
thoughts and behavior. The impact of loss aversion and overconfidence on
corporate strategies, the difficulties of predicting what will make us
happy in the future, the challenges of properly framing risks at work and
at home, the profound effect of cognitive biases on everything from playing
the stock market to planning the next vacation—each of these can be
understood only by knowing how the two systems work together to shape our
judgments and decisions. 

Engaging the reader in a lively conversation about how we think, Kahneman
reveals where we can and cannot trust our intuitions and how we can tap
into the benefits of slow thinking. He offers practical and enlightening
insights into how choices are made in both our business and our personal
lives—and how we can use different techniques to guard against the mental
glitches that often get us into trouble. Thinking, Fast and Slow will
transform the way you think about thinking. 

Category: Science & Technology
Tags: nobel prize psychology economics tversky kahneman decision theory Psychology Social
* "Intuition" pros/cons
Source of Power by Gary Klein
Expert intuition.
You sometimes think you know things without knowing why (or how? you know
them..
Intuitive errors, flaws, biases..
Evidence based medicine vs intuition
Biases of judgement
* Failure to disagree
Experts make funny errors (:-)
* Cognitive effort is real effort
When you see an angry face, the judgment "she is angry" just happens to
you. (Fast thinking). You don't do it. You are not the author of it..
But, try 17x24 (=408)
Pupils dilate by about 50%!
Can not do it while you do a left hand turn into traffic (:-)
Or at least you should not try. Limited resources. If you use them on one
task, less remains for the other.
* intuition is recognition
skill is developed in system one (after a long period of exposure? and
deliberation in system two).
Requires "regularity" and predictibility (chess, e.g.).
If very chaotic, can not predict. Can not recognize any pattern (except fractals!)
* min 21:00
homunculi. Don't explain the mind by invoking little agents in it.
* The end
* Next google talk: Transform Your Mind, Change Your Brain
Google Tech Talk
September 23, 2009

ABSTRACT

Presented by Richard J. Davidson

In this talk, Richard J. Davidson will explore recent scientific research
on the neuroscience of positive human qualities and how they can be
cultivated through contemplative practice. Distinctions among different
forms of contemplative practices will be introduced and they will be shown
to have different neural and behavioral consequences, as well as important
consequences for physical health in both long-term and novice
practitioners. New research also shows that meditation-based interventions
delivered online can produce behavioral and neural changes. Collectively,
this body of research indicates that we can cultivate adaptive neural
changes and strengthen positive human qualities through systematic mental
practice.

Category: Science & Technology
Tags: google tech talk neuroscience meditation
* The end 2


