* 17 Haziran babalar gunu
* google talks et  track=9min out of 1:30:50
** q1 consider levels of perception: signal, data, information, knowledge, wisdom. Compare info vs wisdom

First comment: average age 30, much less ego than in other companies, workspace innovations like room for quiet and meditation, etc..

Thanks to tech, abundance of info, high connectedness, the danger: you
may get drowned in it. Be overwhelmed by it and lose touch with the inner
dimension of stillness -- the source of intelligence and creativity. Most
don't even know that they have it in them. More correct to say: They are
them.  

This is core of spirituality. Spirituality is not a set of beliefs,
thoughts..

9:30

Spirituality is a dimension in you, deeper, higher than thinking..

12:00

Experience Presence now here: alert, conscious, but not thinking..

Analytical thinking itself is not creative..

What is creative insight..

14:00

It is not only what makes you creative, but it also ensures sanity, that
you have inner peace..

How do you touch and benefit from that "formless" place?

1- Only the Now: see that there is nothing but this moment. You can not
experience anything except Now. What is NOW?
Start with sense perceptions.. What is around you... Life and beauty of
everything around.. including artifical life, cloth of the tshirt on you..
No need for acid to appreciate all that!

Now, also feel the sensations in you. Inner body...

21:00

Ok. all of those are perceptions. But, what else is there in the present
moment?? Look deeper... You will sense the most incredible fact, the
deepest truth of human existence.. the deep secret, that you are
aware/conscious/alive... You can not sense anything without that
"awareness" that you are... Called "the light of the world."
Not an object that you can touch, see, even point to...
"I am that I am" Unnameable. Unspeakable.

You are that Presence. Intelligence non conceptual. Primordial. 
Stillness that is formless..

Not lost or controlled by mind noise (voice in the head).
They don't know who they are. They don't know what they do.

25:00

The space where everything happens is Now...

q2 26:30

Web is a model of the mind..

Can technology be used to transcend the mind?

q3 How about those things called emotions?

My life consists of three things:
1- sense perceptions
2- thoughts
3- emotions

Anything else?

46:24

What is the essence of "the room?"
Furniture, walls, ceiling, floor, people in it...
No, it is the space!

But, space is not tangible..

Except when you run out of space in your gmail account.. 
Then you have to drop things (:-)

48:00

"Kingdom of Heaven does not come with signs to be perceived.
But, truly, I tell you, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you."

50:00
 
They asked Buddha: 'tell us about God!'
He kept "noble silence."
Emptiness (:-)

q4 I need a portal into Presence the most when I am unable to remember to
use it. I may be activated. In the heat of the moment... What to do?

Practice when you are not being challenged, when not "activated", when
things are slow...

Become alert! Otherwise you can't truly "see" things..

What's going on now around you.... Problems start to diminish..
The mind will say, I still have problems..

Look == pay attention, use the power of consciousness (not of
ego/wanting/me..)

If you think you have problems, ask yourself what, at this moment, the
problem is. This moment. Not in a year, next month, next week, tomorrow, in
2 hours, in 30 minutes. None of that. Only NOW! All you ever have!

The trouble can not survive in the Present Moment.

A lot of things go wrong in life...

That's why we go to see movies.. 

What is the sub-structure of a movie. Of all movies.

Describe all movies in three words: "Something goes wrong"
It happens to someone else and we rejoice.
But, when it happens to me, I complain!

Things are not meant not to go wrong..

57:00

Evolution thru trial and error..

Good movie (character adapts, grows), bad movie (fixed characters)

~1:05:00 

q: your transformation was instantaneous, others experience it gradually
over years. Why? What makes you different?

a: don't know.

~1:15:00

q: compassion for oneself (especially for engineers craving achievement)

The mind pattern in you (Freud called it super-ego) that self-criticizes,
is not happy with accomplishments so far is just that: a mind pattern. Very
long lived, though. The important thing is to be "aware" of it. Can not
make the super-ego "compassionate." Let it be. You make sure you realize
that what you hear in your head is not truth. It is just a mind pattern...
Be aware of it.

comment by Bradley Horowitz: Childhood violin teacher would critique
saying: "You hear, but you don't listen" This may be one method to use with
the perverted mind..

~1:18:00

q: being in the moment, being in peace is wonderful. Why is there in the society
"attraction to distraction (from peace and the Now)"?

Distractions are like drugs. Substance that makes you feel alive. 
So, realize that you are alive even without those distractions, the
drugs... Substitutes for feeling truly alive..

1:19:30

The basis of most peoples life is the sense that "something is missing". One
complains: I am not complete... What is missing is a true sense of
connectedness with "life/being."

So, we keep looking for a "fix." Greed comes in. When am I greedy? When I
attach to a thought which in not true for me. If I don't get that, I won't
be complete. If I lose that, I will be incomplete.

Looking for a fix in drugs, alchohol, an affair.. But, then, you start
living together and it stops working (:-)

1:23:00 

q: Strong emotions like anxiety, nervousness, jealously, hate... What to do
about them?

a: First be aware that they are there. That negative emotion is in
you. Then note that there is an underlying thought that you've already
believed in. Question it. Inquire. E.g., I am going to lose my job (and
that's a very bad thing). Emotion is the response of the body to the mind
which produces such a thicket of thoughts..
Think of biting into a lemon (or gazing at a beautiful body), and your
mouth begins to salivate.. Thoughts effect the body.

So, now, see that the thought is untrue (even if you can predict the future
:-). And that is only possible when there is awareness. Without awareness,
the thought captures all your live energy. You are the thought.

So, instead, allow the emotion, allow the thought to be. Be the space for
it. Share the emotion/thought with others.. Like: "How funny, I am nervous,
tired, etc.. (:-)"

Coming to the microphone: you feel nervous and you say that you are. With
that you connect with "everybody." If you pretend, you don't..

