* cember
Ya dışındasındır çemberin
Ya da içinde yer alacaksın
Kendin içindeyken
Kafan dışındaysa
Çaresi yok kardeşim
Her akşam böyle içip kederlenip
Mutsuz olacaksın
Meyhane masalarında kahrolacaksın

Şiirlerle şarkılarla
Kendini avutacaksın
Ya dışındasındır çemberin
Ya da içinde yer alacaksın

Söz: Murathan Mungan
Müzik: Selim Atakan

* 2014 Nov 11
Know that:
1- I don't know everything about X ( X = coding or anything :-))
2- I know I want to teach you all you want to learn about X.
3- I know I don't know exactly how.
4- I know it does not matter.
5- Because, when we meet, (like now), and I want to learn by teaching, and
you want to learn by this teaching, learning happens.
* TR/Cagdas Jan 10, 2014
Zamanlama manidar.
Gecmis bos, gelecek bos, ancak simdi manidar.
* Bumper sticker: (2014 Jan 3) The view does not change if you ain't the top dog.
Enlightened version: You don't need to be the top dog to change the view (:-)
Don't just stand there. Do something! -> Don't just do something. Stand there!
* Attentive living to transform/transmute suffering into energy and right action.. Attention to the present moment!
* We suffer because of mis-perceptions about ourselves and others
* Mis-placed anger Hedefinden sapan ofke. Yanlis yerlestirilmis ofke. Yanlis yonlendirilmis ofke..
Police officer (MsX) after studying with Tik Nat Han (Thich Nhat Hanh from On
Being, Sep 26, 2013), encounters a domestic violence case. Wife and little
daughter are scared but not hurt.. MsX goes beyond her programming, has a
softer hearth and a different energy.. Takes the wife and daughter away and
talks to the guy.. A while later, the guy crosses him on the street, grabs
her, gives her a hug and says "You saved my life that night!"
MsX's summary: There was so much suffering and pain. It was a case of mis-placed anger.
* Onemli mi?
Cok degil!
* We are not that different at the depths of our being. (Deepest level, we are One).
But, it is also interesting to see that we are not that different even at
the more visible and tangible levels... My thoughts vs your thoughts? No,
they are rather shared. Human thoughts.. My mind vs your mind? No, just the
human mind. The human question. The eternal questions.. So, not only is the
formlessness One, but even the forms are connected at all
levels/scales. The fractal nature of nature and form.  
* Did God create evil? 11/Nov/2011
Neither yes, nor no! Look into the question!
What is evil? What is GOD?
Act of creation, or existence of anything beyond God, or evil for that
matter, implies subject and a distinct and separate object. Is that so?
One needs a mirror to see her self accurately. (Touching with your fingers
does not quite do it..)
One needs a relationship to see her true self in action, response.
God is manifesting as a finite form (the seemingly infinte universe) as the
"creation" and thru relating to it gets to know Oneself.
So, if evil exists, God "created" it to explore Oneself better..
But, in the infinite and eternal, evil is not.
* Does free will exist? 9/Aug/2011, 17/Jun/2011
Yes.
Do you have it?
Depends. 
First answer: who are you? Who am I?
Do you know who you are?
If you are identified with things that you manifest, you are not free.
First choose freedom, by self-observation. Be aware of things in you and
around you as if they were happenning to someone else.
** Can you be said to have any free will, 
if you are only "reacting" to whatever happens to you (or comes from within)
according to your pre-conditioning?
** I can decide to do things or not do them. Move, eat, etc.. Free will?
** I wake up in the middle of the night, and start thinking about my problems. Free will? 
** Do you remember your first thought this morning when you woke up?
First thought ever?
Can you stop your mind? Can you choose to not think for 10 minutes?
Can you choose to stop breathing?
Your mind is your best tool. 
* Ya oldugun gibi gorun, ya gorundugun gibi ol.
** Oldugun gibi ol!
** Kral soytari olmaya kalkmis, yarim saat sonra gercek bir soytari olmadigi ortaya cikmis. Soytari Kral olmus, mutsuz bir 30 yil sonra cani cikmis!
** Gemin bin beygir gucunde. Ama ne ye yarar? Dumende bir hiyar.
* The end
* From PON
** Creative Use Of Mind (p81 from 6. THE INNER BODY p70 )
If you need to use your mind for a specific purpose, use it in conjunction
with your inner body. Only if you are able to be conscious without thought
can you use your mind creatively, and the easiest way to enter that state
is through your body. Whenever an answer, a solution, or a creative idea is
needed, stop thinking for a moment by focusing attention on your inner
energy field. Become aware of the stillness. When you resume thinking, it
will be fresh and creative. In any thought activity, make it a habit to go
back and forth every few minutes or so between thinking and an inner kind
of listening, an inner stillness. We could say: don't just think with your
head, think with your whole body. 
* 7. PORTALS INTO THE UNMANIFESTED
** Going Deeply Into The Body
I can feel the energy inside my body, especially in my arms and legs, but I
don't seem to be able to go more deeply, as you suggested earlier. 

Make it into a meditation. It needn't take long. Ten to fifteen minutes of
clock time should be sufficient. Make sure first that there are no external
distractions such as telephones or people who are likely to interrupt
you. Sit on a chair, but don't lean back. Keep the spine erect. Doing so
will help you to stay alert. Alternatively, choose your own favorite
position for meditation. 

Make sure the body is relaxed. Close your eyes. Take a few deep
breaths. Feel yourself breathing into the lower abdomen, as it
were. Observe how it expands and contracts slightly with each in and out
breath. Then become aware of the entire inner energy field of the
body. Don't think about it–feel it. By doing this, you reclaim
con-sciousness from the mind. 

* The end
